---
layout: post
title: FIRST Fortaleza 2023.
date: 2023-10-05 12:00:00
description: FIRST (Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams)
tags: First
categories: Events
thumbnail: https://thegfce.org/wp-content/uploads/first.png
giscus_comments: true
related_posts: true
featured: false
images:
  compare: true
  slider: true
toc:
  sidebar: left
---

I'm sharing my recent participation in the FIRST (Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams) Regional Symposium Latin America & Caribbean, hosted by LACNIC, which took place on October 4th and 5th in Fortaleza, Brazil.

This event was a true immersion in cybersecurity, a forum for sharing information about vulnerabilities, incidents, tools, and all other issues that affect the operation of security and incident response teams, providing two days of intense and inspiring learning.

I participated in an Incident Response (IR) training for Ransomware, where our task was to protect a machine against ransomware attacks and keep its services running.

Each team received a Linux virtual machine for simulation. During the lab, we faced several challenging situations and participated in heated discussions. However, with limited time to protect the machine, our VM was eventually compromised, and our web services became unavailable. (This part was expected in the lab).

It was a critical moment, but the training scenario evolved, and now we faced the challenge of recovering the encrypted files. Through the analysis of logs, we managed to identify the possible perpetrator of the attack. We discovered that the compromised user had executed a binary, and this binary was still present on the machine.

After several attempts, a surprising suggestion arose: check the binary's manual. To our surprise, we found that the same program responsible for encrypting the files also contained a decryption function.

We successfully decrypted the files and restored the services. In the second part of the lab, we had to write a comprehensive public report about the events.

The experience was remarkably realistic, as we received the machine without any prior information, except that we would be dealing with a ransomware incident. Although our team was formed on the spot, we quickly managed to divide the roles. While one part focused on hardening, the other actively looked for potential indicators of compromise.

We deepened our analysis beyond the challenge's expectations and identified that the tool used in the exercise was [https://github.com/hazcod/ransomwhere](https://github.com/hazcod/ransomwhere), a Ransomware Proof of Concept.

In the end, we not only recovered the compromised machine but also produced a comprehensive report documenting all the actions taken, the lessons learned, and the strategies implemented. This experience highlighted the importance of preparedness and effective collaboration in cybersecurity situations.

<swiper-container keyboard="true" navigation="true" pagination="true" pagination-clickable="true" pagination-dynamic-bullets="true" rewind="true">
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="/assets/img/First/First_1.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="/assets/img/First/First_2.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
</swiper-container>
